TITLE: Niskanen Summer Institute: Democracy that works
FORMAT: article
SOURCE: https://www.niskanencenter.org/niskanen-summer-institute-democracy-that-works/
WORDS: 486

The Niskanen Summer Institute is a fully funded, intensive academic program in Washington, D.C., for leadership-minded undergraduates who wish to understand the intersection of politics and policy and explore the Niskanen Center’s framework for institutional reform.
The Niskanen Center is playing a key role in debates about climate and energy, immigration, criminal justice, healthcare, government effectiveness, and the welfare system. Our work helped pioneer the ideas of the abundance agenda, which aims to solve problems in American life by producing more of the important but scarce resources that are critical to liberty, opportunity, and prosperity, from housing and healthcare services to energy and infrastructure.
Participants in this one-week program will develop an insider’s understanding of how Washington works and how to influence the debates that determine the nation’s economic and political trajectories. Along the way, they will interact deeply with distinctive thinkers and creative policymakers who are shaping that future.
Location: Downtown Washington, D.C.
Dates: June 8 – June 12
Program size: 15–20 students
Students will receive a $250 stipend. The program will cover the costs of lodging, travel, meals, and transportation (including flights).
The program is scheduled to run prior to summer internships, though it is not required that you also participate in a summer internship in Washington. If you are accepted and need help changing your internship schedule, we would be happy to contact your employer.
What to expect:
Daily seminars and discussions with Niskanen staff, fellows, and affiliates
Exposure to the policy, philosophical, and historical insights shaping key debates in today’s distinctive political environment
Field visits to Capitol Hill and other key Washington institutions, and conversations with policymakers and advocates
Training in government affairs, political communications, research, and writing
Social opportunities with your cohort
The program will cover topics including:
The causes and consequences of the current political realignment
The challenges facing American institutions and the opportunities for bold reform
Emerging policy debates in topics such as housing, climate and energy, state capacity, immigration, regulation, the welfare system, and healthcare
The prospects for pragmatic politics and coalition building in a disrupted policymaking environment
Who are we looking for?
Visionary thinkers: Students eager to engage with foundational questions about liberal democracy and the open society
Intellectually open: Individuals who value diverse perspectives and are enthusiastic about engaging in cross-ideological collaboration
Collaborative problem-solvers: People who excel in a fast-paced, team-oriented environment and are interested in advancing our mission through cooperation, discussion, and continuous learning
College students in the class of 2026 or later are eligible for the program.
To apply, please submit a resume, your answers to three short-essay questions, an unofficial transcript, and the contact information for a recommendation letter.
Apply here
Application timeline:
Applications are due February 27.
Applicants will be interviewed on a rolling basis.
Students will be informed of decisions by March 27.
This page will be updated as programming is confirmed and speakers are booked. For questions, please contact
summerinstitute@niskanencenter.org