TITLE: Arnold Ventures and the Niskanen Center welcome new legislation to help solve more violent crimes in Michigan
FORMAT: article
SOURCE: https://www.niskanencenter.org/arnold-ventures-and-the-niskanen-center-welcome-new-legislation-to-help-solve-more-violent-crimes-in-michigan/
WORDS: 772

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
Media Contact:
Arnold Ventures |
media@arnoldventures.org
Louisa Tavlas |
ltavlas@niskanencenter.org
Lansing, MI. (October 15, 2025) —
Arnold Ventures
and the
Niskanen Center
applaud Senator Stephanie Chang (D-District 3) and Representative Sarah Lightner (R-District 45) for introducing new bipartisan legislation in Michigan designed to solve more crimes and provide support and closure for crime victims.
The likelihood of getting caught is one of the most important crime deterrents. Yet,
the majority
of violent offenses in Michigan currently go unsolved.
New polling
, commissioned by Arnold Ventures, shows that Michiganders overwhelmingly approve of efforts to increase the number of crimes that are solved and keep their communities safe.
The Violent Crime Clearance Act, which is supported by law enforcement groups, would establish a grant program to provide law enforcement with more resources to solve crimes. These grant funds, if appropriated or identified, could be used to hire, train, and retain investigative personnel, acquire and upgrade equipment and technology, and provide supportive services to crime victims.
The bill’s focus on solving more crimes is overwhelmingly endorsed by Michiganders.
Polling
released today finds that 82% of voters in the state support the Violent Crime Clearance Act, including 88% of Republicans, 83% of Democrats, and 71% of independents. The poll includes insights from 600 Michigan voters and was conducted September 2-4, 2025.
“Getting closure for victims of crime and their families, and protecting our communities from further violence is a core mission of law enforcement, yet solving cases takes an immense amount of time and resources,” said
Mike Sauger, president of the Michigan Fraternal Order of Police
. “In many law enforcement communities across Michigan, those resources are lacking. The Michigan Fraternal Order of Police supports bills introduced by Rep. Sarah Lightner and Sen. Stephanie Chang to help extend further resources to law enforcement, such as evidence-processing technology and investigative tactics, as well as funding for more personnel.”
“To improve public safety, we must solve violent crimes. In doing so, we can bring justice to victims and hold holding perpetrators accountable,” said
Alyson Clements, director of criminal justice advocacy at Arnold Ventures
. “Michigan voters from both parties recognize the importance of closing cases and overwhelmingly support the Violent Crime Clearance Act, which aims to provide law enforcement the resources they need to solve more crimes.”
“Everyone suffers when crimes go unsolved and justice isn’t served. The Michigan Violent Crime Clearance Improvement Grant Program will give law enforcement the resources necessary to catch criminals who today have little fear of consequences,” said
Jason Olin, senior government affairs manager for criminal justice at the Niskanen Center
. “We’re grateful to Chairwoman Lightner and Chairwoman Chang for introducing this important piece of legislation, which will help put an end to criminal impunity in Michigan.”
“For victims, their families, and their friends, closure is one of the most important things we can provide,” said
Oakland County Sheriff Michael Bouchard
. “Support from the state to improve clearance rates—resolving cases and delivering that closure—is invaluable and deeply appreciated.”
“As prosecutors, our core obligation is to deliver justice for victims and their families and protect our communities from further violence. While we work tirelessly to close every case possible, the reality is that clearance rates are not where they should be, and better resources are desperately needed,” said
Macomb County Prosecutor Pete Lucido
. “Bipartisan work at the Capitol to bolster resources for all of Michigan’s law enforcement community will help to more effectively process evidence, provide stronger support for victims, and ultimately produce higher clearance rates. I strongly support the efforts of Rep. Sarah Lightner and Sen. Stephanie Chang, and look forward to advocating in Lansing as we work to get these bills across the finish line.”
###
Arnold Ventures
is a philanthropy that supports research to understand the root causes of America’s most persistent and pressing problems, as well as evidence-based solutions to address them. By focusing on systemic change, AV is working to improve the lives of American families, strengthen their communities, and promote their economic opportunity. Since Laura and John Arnold launched their foundation in 2008, the philanthropy has expanded, and Arnold Ventures’ focus areas include education, criminal justice, health, infrastructure, and public finance, advocating for bipartisan policy reforms that will lead to lasting, scalable change. The Arnolds became signatories of the Giving Pledge in 2010.
The Niskanen Center
advances an evidence-based agenda to reduce the social costs of crime and punishment. Our priority is to deter crime and reduce violence by building effective systems that deliver proportional punishment swiftly and predictably, and by ensuring law enforcement has the capacity to keep our neighborhoods safe.