TITLE: Op-ed: RFK Jr., Dr. Oz, and Elizabeth Warren agree on at least one big thing
FORMAT: article
SOURCE: https://www.niskanencenter.org/op-ed-rfk-jr-dr-oz-and-elizabeth-warren-agree-on-at-least-one-big-thing/
WORDS: 295

This article originally appeared in The Argument on October 3, 2025
.
Believe it or not, some doctors are underpaid. Relatively speaking, at least.
One of the most underrated problems in American medicine is that becoming a primary-care physician makes little to no financial sense. Clinicians who go into fields like family medicine earn 38 percent less than
specialists
on average, despite having similar training requirements. Faced with that dismal math, medical students and residents tend to pursue more lucrative options like becoming surgeons or dermatologists.
As a result, the United States currently faces a shortfall of about 13,000 primary-care physicians, which is expected to balloon to more than 87,000 by 2037, according to
federal estimates
. Wait times for a primary-care appointment now
average
several weeks, and those practices are
less likely
to accept new patients compared with specialists’ offices.
This shortage isn’t just a matter of national inconvenience; it’s also a danger to public health. Thanks in part to our exceptionally high
obesity rates
, the U.S. is drowning in chronic illnesses like diabetes and heart disease that account for
eight of the top 10
causes of death. Primary care is the frontline against these ailments; without it, complications spiral unchecked into life-threatening situations.
Having enough specialists is important, too — nobody wants to wait months to see an orthopedist about their back pain. But at the population level, primary care simply
saves more lives
, thanks to its focus on prevention, early detection, and chronic-disease management. Adding just one primary-care doctor for every 10,000 people cuts mortality by
five percent
and increases the average life span by nearly
two months
.
Thankfully, the Trump administration now looks intent on attacking a root cause of our primary-care shortage.
Read the full article here.