TITLE: A new program removes a major employment barrier for international doctors
FORMAT: article
SOURCE: https://www.niskanencenter.org/a-new-program-removes-a-major-employment-barrier-for-international-doctors/
WORDS: 853

The leading professional organization for doctors of internal medicine is taking an important step toward easing the
U.S. physician shortage
, creating a
path
for licensed, foreign-trained doctors to earn specialist credentials without having to repeat their residency training in the United States or Canada.
The move, by the American Board of Internal Medicine (ABIM), echoes
our call
earlier this year for broader recognition of international physician training. It comes as a
growing number of states
have started to implement alternative pathways to licensure for internationally trained physicians (ITPs) that also don’t require a U.S. or Canadian residency. As of 2024, international graduates made up
23 percent
of all licensed physicians in the U.S. – and that share is
growing
.
ABIM’s
Pilot Pathway E
will remove a key barrier to employment for ITPs licensed through these alternative pathways, helping them secure jobs that match their medical training. It could serve as a model for other specialty boards and demonstrate to states and providers alike that alternative licensing programs are viable pathways to certification and employment.
Why this matters
Practicing medicine in the U.S.
requires
a state medical license. Historically, state licensing boards have
required
candidates to complete a residency program in the U.S. or Canada. Residency programs offer medical graduates a period of supervised clinical practice, consisting of
rigorous training
that lasts anywhere from three to seven years. In most states, ITPs, who have already completed residency training abroad, have to repeat years of training in the U.S. or Canada to earn a U.S. license, even though many international residency programs are
similar
to those in the U.S.
But in recent years, states have been introducing alternative licensing pathways to address the physician shortage. As of August 2025,
18 states
had implemented alternative pathways for qualified ITPs to earn licensure, often by practicing while sponsored by a healthcare facility or provider. Similar legislation is pending in
9 more states
and counting.
States are rapidly taking these steps because many are
short on providers
, particularly in primary care specialties and in rural areas. Part of the shortage is due to insufficient residency program capacity, made worse by
federal policy
, including a cap on Medicare-funded residency program slots. Participating in a residency program requires successfully going through a
matching
process, in which applicants and programs rank each other and an algorithm matches applicants to programs. In 2025,
9,536
applicants failed to match to a residency program, and 6,291 of those were international graduates. Alternative licensing pathways for ITPs are
essential
to bypass this residency bottleneck.
But even after becoming fully licensed through these pathways, ITPs face a critical barrier to employment: They are not eligible to take exams to qualify as board certified in their areas of
specialty
. That’s because most specialty boards still require candidates to complete U.S. or Canadian residency
programs
in order to sit for specialty certification exams.
While specialty board certification is not a
legal requirement
for a licensed doctor to practice medicine, it is often
crucial
for employment. Health systems, hospitals, and physician groups view board certification to be
an important credential
that demonstrates competency. What’s more, premiums for malpractice insurance, often covered by employers, are
higher
for physicians who lack specialty board certification.
ABIM’s new pilot program makes it one of the first specialty boards to remove this barrier to employment and align certification requirements with the emerging trend toward alternative state licensing requirements. The program maintains high standards of competency for candidates – to
qualify
, ITPs must already be licensed to practice medicine in the U.S. or Canada and have completed additional subspecialty training through a fellowship accredited by the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME), meeting “exceptionally qualified candidate” criteria.
While some other specialty boards offer alternative certification pathways for ITPs, those routes have much stricter criteria. Only ITPs who are
academic faculty
, who have already been practicing medicine in the U.S. for
multiple years
, who already hold a specialty board certification in another
country
, or who were trained in a few
select countries
can qualify for these pathways.
ABIM’s program allows more ITPs to prove their competency and eligibility for certification.
Specialty board certification pathways like ABIM’s are crucial to the viability of alternative state licensing programs. Without them, newly licensed ITPs would have to repeat their residency to get certified, reducing the incentive to go through the alternative licensing process at all. And providers may have
less incentive
to sponsor these ITPs for supervised training under alternative licensing pathways, as there would be no clear pathway to certification.
Looking ahead
As the U.S. tries to overcome its
physician shortage
, qualified ITPs with residency training abroad are a key, untapped resource. As it stands, many qualified physicians in the U.S. are unable to practice medicine at their full capacity due to restrictive licensing and certification requirements. As more states consider alternative licensing programs, alternative specialty certification pathways will be essential to their success and to subsequent ITP employment. ABIM’s pilot certification program, then, comes at a critical moment. All other specialty boards should
follow suit
.